Good morning everybody,
this is session 307,
Apple Tools for Carbon Development.
I'm Chris Espinosa.
I've been with the Development Tools team
working on Xcode specifically
for the last six months or so.
I've been working with
Development Tools in specific since...
[Transcript missing]
Trying to figure out
where to point my clicker.
It doesn't point.
There we go.
Okay.
What we're going to cover this
morning is an overview of Apple Tools.
You've probably seen three or four
of these overviews of Apple Tools,
but we're going to do it from a
Carbon perspective this morning.
We're only going to be talking
about Carbon applications.
The process of bringing a project,
whether it be a project builder
project or a Code Warrior project,
into Xcode.
Getting your code to build with the
Xcode IDE and with the GCC compiler.
Some hints and tips for optimizing the
build time and the turnaround time,
how you can take advantage
of the Xcode features.
A little bit about Xcode
support for Mac resources,
if you have resource-based
Carbon projects,
which most of you do.
And just a little bit about designing
Carbon interfaces with Interface Builder.
There are other sessions
on Interface Builder,
and there's a really great session
on building a modern Mac application,
which we'll cover using NIBS and
Interface Builders later
on that I'll point you to,
but I'm just going to do
a brief overview of that.
Now, I want to do the
standard disclaimer here.
I am talking about Xcode,
and I am talking about Carbon.
The fact that I'm talking about
those two things does not mean
that we are killing everything
else that I'm not talking about.
We are not killing Cocoa Development.
We are not killing Objective-C.
We are not killing AppleScript.
We are not killing Java or
EOF or anything like that.
The fact that I fail to talk
about something does not
signal its imminent demise.
I just want to make that clear.
So the tools you've already
seen in a couple of sessions,
the Xcode integrated
development environment,
and you've seen a lot of
the great features of that,
the CodeSense feature,
the great indexing,
the great workflow and navigation.
It's a project manager and build system.
It's got an integrated code
editor and an integrated debugger.
The debugger I'm going
to show you tomorrow.
We're just going to build today.
Interface Builder is another key tool.
It's primarily a Cocoa development tool,
but we are moving more and more
to using Interface Builder as the
principal design tool for Carbon.
And if you want to get at certain new
Aqua elements through the Carbon toolbox,
the best way to do them,
in some ways the only way to do that,
is to use Interface Builder to design
nibs in order to get at those objects.
And then there are
some performance tools,
and all these performance tools
work with your Carbon applications.
The Sampler Performance Analysis Tools,
the malloc Debug Memory Analyzer,
the Object Alloc Object Analyzer,
that is primarily for Objective-C,
and then the Chud Low-Level
Machine Tools will analyze anything
as long as it's expressed in bytes.
[Transcript missing]
Xcode loves Carbon.
We are working very,
very hard to make Xcode a
great development environment
for your application.
We're making it easy to import
Carbon projects wherever they come from,
Project Builder or Code Warrior.
It compiles Mac resource files,
whether they be .r or .rsrc files,
ties in with existing resource
editors in a seamless way.
It supports building nib files if you are
moving to nib files in Interface Builder.
It's the best way to use the
new HI elements and the best
way to use Carbon Events.
And it supports combining Carbon and
Cocoa in the same application.
There are a lot of new APIs that
we have that are Cocoa only,
and you can get to them from
Carbon using Objective-C++.
And if you want to take your existing
Carbon app and start using some of the
unique and interesting Cocoa features,
Xcode is the best way
to start doing that.
So let's look at bringing
a project into Xcode.
There are a few simple steps.
First, you need to make sure you
have a Carbon application.
If you have a Mac OS 9 application
that's still based on Interface Lab,
first thing you've got to do is Carbonize
it before you can bring it into Xcode.
Because Mac OS X applications must
be Carbon to run in Mac OS X native.
And if you've got a 9 application,
Carbonize it on 9 first,
and then you can bring it
into Xcode on Mac OS X.
Then you need to bring it into Maco.
Maco is the code format for Mac OS X.
See the description for
the Mac OS X application.
The "CFM" is for
Mac OS 9 and for Classic.
If you're going to be building
a Mac OS X application,
we really strongly recommend you
move it into the Maco format to
take most advantage of Mac OS X and
to take most advantage of Xcode.
Most of the rapid turnaround
features like Fix and Continue and
Zero Link only work in the Maco format.
Then you need to adjust your build
settings to get your project to build.
Build settings are always very fussy,
and working in Xcode is no exception.
So if you move a project
either from Project Builder or
from Code Warrior into Xcode,
you're going to be spending most of
your time tweaking your build settings,
making sure that you're building
what you want to build when.
And then the last step is when you
finally get your project building,
you're going to have to look at your
source code because the GCC 3.3 compiler
has some differences from GCC 3.1,
which Project Builder used,
and it has some differences from
the Code Warrior MWCC compiler,
and you're going to need to
make some changes in your source
code in order to cope with that.
In the demo we're going to do today,
we're going to make exactly four changes
in the source code to bring a large
Code Warrior project over into Xcode.
So first step,
carbonizing your application.
I really shouldn't have to say this.
We've been talking about this
for three or four years now.
Just the quick steps you should
have done this years ago if
you've still got a Mac OS 9 only,
Interface Live only application.
You isolate your Mac OS usage to just
the subset supported by CarbonLib.
You modernize it to use new APIs.
You remove the linkages to
Interface Live and start using
CarbonLib or its stub instead.
We still have posted this tool
that will look at your application
and tell you what Carbon APIs you
are using and not using that will
help you make this transition.
If you haven't done that now,
do that now,
and then come back at the end
of the session and we'll talk.
The next thing is converting to Mach-O.
If you have a project
builder application,
it's already Mach-O.
If you have a CodeWarrior application,
I recommend the best thing to do
is to change your project from
CFM to Mach-O in the CodeWarrior
environment where it's familiar,
where you've got more
control over things,
where you don't have to be changing
three variables at the same time.
CodeWarrior does a good job of
building Mach-O applications,
so if you just go into the target
settings panel and change the linker
setting to Mac OS X PowerPC Mach-O,
that will get you a Mach-O application,
and that will start bringing in all
of the changes you need to make in
order to make a Mach-O application.
If you have a very simple application
that doesn't load shared libraries,
it doesn't bring in static libraries,
it doesn't call plugins,
basically all it does is
hit main and then run.
There's very, very little to do.
It's just a binary loader format.
If you happen to have something
that uses a plugin architecture,
if you do some dynamic loading,
you'll have to migrate the
APIs that you call in order to load
those plugins from CodeFragment
Manager APIs to the Mach-O APIs.
What we recommend is to use the
CFPlugin architecture in Core Foundation.
CFPlugin is a way to dynamically load
plugins that could be either CFM.
Or Mach-O, and what that allows you to
do is maintain compatibility
with existing CFM plugins,
but also support Mach-O plugins as well.
The only hard part is
that if those plugins,
the CFM plugins,
happen to call back into your application
and expect you to be a CFM application,
that's a particularly difficult case.
If you want to come to one of the
feedback forums or down to the
porting lab or catch me afterwards,
we have some techniques
to deal with that.
They just involve making a lot of...
...a lot of CFM glue that looks
like a CFM link library in your
application that calls in to the Mach-O.
It's a tough problem,
but a lot of people don't have it.
[Transcript missing]
The second thing you do is after you
import is that you need to move from
the Code Warrior style precompiled
header mechanism to the Xcode
style precompiled header mechanism.
The two compilers have
somewhat different mechanisms,
and you're going to get no joy in
anything until you deal with the headers.
Because until you get your
precompiled headers right,
you won't get the speed
advantages of Xcode,
and you're going to get
a lot of build failures,
and it's not going to be fun.
The third thing is if you
happen to be using the
Power Plant application framework,
there are a small number of changes
you need to make in Power Plant for
Power Plant to be compiled by the
GCC 3.3 compiler and build against
the Apple standard libraries.
A very small number of changes.
The Power Plant sources
are really very clean,
and the GCC compiler is
really quite compatible.
There are just a couple of
changes you need to make,
and we'll show you.
Then the fourth thing is you need to
fix your target settings to get rid
of some link errors and make sure that
Xcode is building your project properly.
And then once you build,
then you need to make a couple of
changes in the resource files in
order to work with the developer
release version of Xcode.
We're going to get these worked
out by the time Xcode 1.0 ships,
but right now there are some
things you have to do to the
resource files to bring them in.
And then you get to work
on warnings and errors,
real differences between the compilers.
Usually these are things that
MetroWorks was lenient about,
that GCC is stricter about.
Sometimes it's things that MetroWorks
supported or used in a different way
that GCC interprets in a different way,
often gray areas in the standards.
For most mainstream
standards-compliant C and C++ code,
you can compile tens of thousands
of lines without seeing an error.
So to do this demo,
I'm going to bring up the
useful and lovely Scott Tooker,
who has put together--
An example of, he did the importer that
imports Code Warrior projects,
and he's going to take an example of a
fairly interesting Code Warrior project.
Thanks, Chris.
It's a little bit of a misnomer
to say I did the importer.
I basically took an old version of the
importer and made it work a lot better.
So, what I'm going to show you here
today is we wanted to find a project
that we would bring over and just
show the whole import process,
from importing to then going through
and fixing all the problems to
actually running the application.
And so we picked Appearance Demo,
which is a common Power Plant example.
And so just for those of
you who have never seen it,
which is probably not very many,
this is Appearance Demo.
So it's basically a showcase for
all of the Power Plant widgets.
And we thought this was a good
example because it's small,
but it also uses Power Plant,
like many of you.
And we wanted to show that
Xcode can work with Power Plant.
You can run Power Plant,
and it just runs and works.
So let me put that.
So the first thing we're
going to do is launch Xcode.
We're going to import the project.
So you just say import
code where your project.
Let me choose . And so you
see here I have a path to--
unlike Project Builder,
we take the actual
Code Warrior project file.
And also,
you can change them if you want,
although by default it's just the same.
We also have this import
global source trees.
We support source trees now.
So if you have source
trees in Code Warrior,
we can pull them over
at the per app level.
In fact,
the importer creates a source tree to
deal with the compiler relative paths you
may have in your Code Warrior project.
So what we're doing here is we
are using Apple Script to launch
Code Warrior and then ask it,
okay,
I want an XML version of the project.
Then we take that XML and we go scanning
through it and find all your files.
And because Project Builder likes to
have all the headers in the project,
it likes to be very explicit,
we actually then -- wow.
Sorry, I've never actually done
it on a fast machine.
I thought I'd have more time.
But CX code's really fast.
But anyway, just to finish up,
we actually bring in all that stuff.
So by this time,
what we're asking you is, OK,
we want to know your encoding.
I recommend that for the older project,
especially older projects,
that you just go ahead with
the Mac OS Roman encoding.
Because that's probably what CodeWarrior
was-- when you created the files,
that's what CodeWarrior was using.
So let's go ahead and
start with the target.
You'll notice that you
get a native target.
So we're not using the old
project builder targets here.
We're using the new native Xcode targets.
And the first thing we're going to
want to do is set up the prefix header.
As Chris mentioned,
the precompiled support right now
is a bit different from CodeWarrior.
So there's some things you need
to do to make it work well.
So the first thing we're going to do
is we're just going to double check
and see what the prefix file is.
Oops.
Of course, if Scott could type,
life would be better.
So as you can see,
we bring over the prefix.
header
So it's appearance demo Mach prefix.
And we actually add this to your target.
So let me just move this out of
the-- let's close this for a second.
And let me just find the prefix.
So there it is.
And so you can see it's right here.
But if we go and try to build-- I'm
not even going to try to build it,
because what's going to happen,
it's going to fail,
because it's going to bring in MSL.
The importer by default
doesn't bring over MSL stuff.
So what we need to do is we
need to replace this prefix file
with one that doesn't use MSL.
We want to use the
system libraries instead.
So what I'm going to do is
trick-- is I'm going to fake out--
I'm going to fake out Xcode.
Okay.
And while Scott's doing that,
if we could go back to the slides.
Yeah.
[Transcript missing]
Let me talk about pre-compiled headers
while Scott's putting that together.
Code Warrior has a concept that
they will pre-compile anything,
a .h file, a .pch file.
They'll even pre-compile C and C++ files.
Anything you can throw at the compiler,
they will pre-compile for you,
either from a menu item or from a
directive inside a file or from a special
pre-compiled header target in a project.
What you usually end up doing if
you want to have a different phase
to pre-pre-compile your headers
is you have like a library target
that builds a null library with
a name like "throw me away" later.
And in the course of doing that,
it pre-compiles your headers and
deposits them in a certain location
where other targets expect them.
Well, Xcode works in a
completely different way.
It's really much simpler.
You take your prefix file,
and every target has a prefix file.
And if you check a checkbox,
it pre-compiles that prefix file
when it needs to for that target.
That's all you need to do, really.
You don't have to set up special targets
and special projects to build it.
The build system manages when your
.pch file needs to be rebuilt.
If it needs to be rebuilt,
it rebuilds it.
If it doesn't, it doesn't.
So it's pretty simple.
All you need to do is figure
out the content you need to
have in your prefix file,
put it in a prefix file.
Put that prefix file into your settings,
and then check the checkbox,
and you've got pre-compiled
headers automatically.
So if we can go back
to the-- MALE SPEAKER:
Yeah, so-- OK.
Finder's being a little flaky,
so we'll move on.
So what I wanted to go over now is,
actually, because this is a preview,
we haven't had a chance to completely
move over to all the new build settings.
So I just wanted to go through a couple
things that you're going to need to do
manually that when we were doing this,
we ran into and wanted to
make sure you understand.
The first one is the C language standard.
By default, currently it comes up as C99.
Well, for older projects,
we recommend that you set
it to compiler default,
especially if you're using C++.
You'll get all these
errors and warnings about,
oh, well,
C99 doesn't make any sense for C++.
Another thing is that, for example,
in this particular case,
Code Warrior will force C++.
Well,
the importer interprets that as saying,
oh, use dash XC++, which will force C++.
But it turned out that
they were all C++ files,
so you can just get rid
of that in many cases.
Also, the F exceptions and F RTTI options
in the other C flags.
They're just not needed because we
turn those things on by default.
And then finally, there is one kind of
thing we're going to fix,
but you have to fix now yourself,
which is if you go
To get your precompiled
header to build properly,
if you're only using C++,
currently what we've found is that
you're going to need to tell Xcode
that you only want a C++ dialect.
It actually turns out with
our precompiled technology,
because we have under the covers
multiple different compilers,
we have to say which
dialects you want to.
For the final one,
we'll take care of this automatically.
For the majority of cases right now,
you have to set it.
And then finally,
one of the new features you've
been hearing about is Zero Link.
Well, unfortunately,
the importer didn't quite get the ability
to set that for you automatically,
but it's really simple.
So I'm going to go through that now.
If we just go to the project
inspector and go to styles,
so we just want to add one.
thing, which is let me find ZeroLink.
It's under the standard build settings.
You can just type in zero.
There it is.
And you just want to check that on.
And notice I'm doing this in
the development build style.
If you haven't heard,
we have these build styles
that overlay our targets.
The idea here is we only want to
use ZeroLink when you're doing your
debugging and you're developing.
When you actually go to
make a deployment build,
you want to make sure ZeroLink is off
because we don't want you shipping
apps that are not properly linked.
So let me go ahead and we will build.
So just to give a more detailed-- oh,
the build failed.
Why?
Oh, of course.
This is part of the demo.
We expected a failure at this point.
Yes.
We expected a failure?
We didn't expect this failure.
Okay.
Chris Espinosa: Actually,
we expected this failure later.
We expected this failure later.
Chris Espinosa: Yeah.
So what we expected to be able to
show you was that Power Plant isn't
quite happy with... Let me
try one thing real quick here.
Let's just try to clean it.
You're right.
Why is it trying to do this now?
Chris Espinosa: I know.
Because the demo gods hate us.
Chris Espinosa:
Why is Finder hanging on me?
Because the demo gods hate me.
Okay.
So we'll go to slides.
Chris Espinosa: Yes.
So this is a power plant application,
and the failure you were supposed to
see was not the failure that we're
going to address in three slides.
Oh, go back, go back, go back, go back.
This is the failure
you're supposed to see.
So what you'll notice here is we have a
bunch of failures that are in Lstream.
This is inside of Power Plant.
This is not any of our
code in the example.
And so what we're going to have
to do is now Chris can take,
while I switch the new
Power Plant stuff into place,
Chris can go through the changes
you'll have to make to Power Plant,
which are really minor.
Okay.
Back to the slides.
So the errors you saw up there the second
time when we got the correct errors
on the screen were some differences
between the GCC compiler's interpretation
of the power plant source code and the
MetaWorks compiler's interpretation
of the power plant source code,
especially when it relates to
how they use system headers.
Since what we've done for you is migrate
you from the MSL Mach-O headers to the
actual Apple standard library headers,
there are a couple of library
differences that make a
difference when using power plant,
and there's one thing where
GCC interprets what you do differently.
What we document in the transition book,
which I'll tell you about later,
and what you need to do to
your power plant sources is
you need to make four clean,
compatible changes to
your power plant sources.
And then GCC can compile
any power plant application.
There are some changes
to the LException class,
which subclasses the
system exception class,
and the system exception class
has throw specializers on its
destructor and its what method.
So you need to add those to
the power plant LException
class so that it will match the
underlying system exception class.
There's a place in lgatabscontrolimp.cp
where it uses multiple instances
of a local declaration inside
cases of a switch statement,
and GCC doesn't like the
way the code works there,
and it requests that you move the local
declaration outside the individual cases,
so that's fairly easy to do.
And in lstream.h,
the streaming operators for long
double and short double are already
declared elsewhere in the Apple headers,
so you get a multiple definition
if they're re-declared in
the power plant headers.
So you need to just case those out,
and usually we do a pound if not GNU C,
then include those,
so that your power plant sources
can be compiled and built.
And then, of course,
we have the power plant source,
which is the source that's being
built by Code Warrior still,
even when you're also
building them with GCC.
So this is pretty much all the
source changes we have to do,
and they're all in power plant
to make the appearance demo run.
So what Scott's doing is he's
actually switching over to a
fixed version of power plant,
and then he's going to rebuild.
Which I have already done.
And now he's rebuilt,
and all of those compiler
errors have gone away,
and now he gets the errors we saw before,
which are resource errors.
Right.
At the bottom, it says, "Error.
File.
Res merger.
C failed to open source file -39."
So if we can go back to the slides now.
Skip that and come back,
because he says we're
going to see this later.
So this is the error we're seeing now.
There is a bug in the res merger tool,
which if you ask it to generate data
fork resource files and you provide
heterogeneous input that's mixed data
force and resource fork resource files,
it gets confused and fails.
And we will fix that by
Xcode 1.0 by Panther.
But for now,
if you're bringing a project in that
has resource files and the fork in
which the resource files originate
is different from the fork in which
you want the resource files to go,
and to build a
Mac OS X package application,
you generally want your resources to
go in the data fork of the resource
files in the resource folder.
Then you're going to have to do
some massaging of your resources.
In order to get them to build with Xcode.
And what we did here was we basically
took all the .rsrc and .ppob
files both in the appearance demo
itself and in Power Plant itself,
and we just derezzed them
into .rs and brought them in.
And that has some extra advantages
because then the indexer in Xcode
can search them and you can have them
in text form and you can check them
in more easily to Perforce or CVS,
which are not really resource fork aware.
And what we've done here is we've
moved all those .rsrc files into .r
files to get around the resource error.
Now we're going to go back to
get past the resource error.
Right, in fact.
This time you can watch it build.
So if you notice really fast there,
we did the resing,
and so now it's going and
merging the resources.
See, this is where we have
the time to now talk.
Right?
And so you'll notice as we come in,
just like Code Warrior,
we have this little code column so
you can see the code and you can
sort by that while we're going on.
We also provide these check marks
to indicate what needs to be built.
To the right of the code here,
you'll notice we have errors and
warnings on a per-file basis.
So this is a substantial
amount of Code Warrior code,
both the appearance demo itself and
the entire Power Plant framework
that's compiling without error
in GCC with very few changes.
So our challenges so far have
been get the header files right,
and we've done that.
Get the sources right,
And get the resources right,
and we've done that.
And once we have all of
the binaries in place,
then the linker kicks in.
And getting the linker right is
the last phase before you have a
running application and can debug.
So now we're linking,
and we will see the build succeeded.
But it lies.
And it lies because we
turned zero link on.
Zero link defers link
errors to execution time.
So now if you try to run it.
Thanks, thanks.
And then-- oh, no, didn't run.
Scott Tooker: It didn't run.
Let's check the run log.
Chris Espinosa:
So what you'll see is you'll
see this unknown symbol
and then some bizarre name.
Really what it comes down to
is currently in the prerelease,
when you use ZeroLink in
your C++ application,
you have to link against
the standard C++ library.
For the final release,
we should be able to take
care of this automatically.
But for now, you're going to need to set
this in other linker flags.
So I'll take you through that right now.
If we go back here,
what I can do is let's just bring
up the standard build settings.
We'll look for link.
Oops, not link, link.
Let's see.
So I will be brave.
One other thing you will have to do
is usually you have to touch a file.
There's a few dependency cases that
we don't deal with in the preview.
Let me try it now.
Build succeeded again,
and now we can run.
And it launches.
There we go.
And lest you say, "Oh, but Scott,
but Scott, this was built with Xcode.
Oh, it must look different."
"Yeah." "Oh, you swapped the power plant.
Yeah." "Yeah.
So that's why I decided
it's too good for my-- yeah.
So--" "Back to the slides.
Back to the slides."
Just one clarification there.
What it was running into there
did not have to do with the
changes we made to Power Plant.
It's with some other
issues that we know about.
So in linking,
the last step is that the importer
maps your key target settings.
It tries to read as much as it can from
your project builder project file and
translate it into the linker flags that
you need to set in your Xcode file.
There are some things we need,
right now you need to include dash
else std c++ in your linker flags.
We'll take care of that
for you in the 1.0 version.
An important thing is
that often the importer,
if you've built a Mach-O project and
you've left .a files sitting around,
the importer will bring in a
lot of Code Warrior .a files.
And if those have been linked
with the Code Warrior linker,
then the Apple Mach-O linker is
not necessarily going to like them.
So you need to throw out the .a
files that have been imported,
and if they're built by subprojects,
then you need to re-add
those into your project.
So that's what I was
talking about before.
If you're building from the bottom up,
you need to rewire all of the
subsidiary parts back into
your project as you built it.
In the 1.0 version,
we expect to have much better
inter-target dependencies and
inter-project dependencies.
Do more of that for you automatically,
but with the disks you have in hand,
that work you need to do manually.
And then the main thing is you notice
that the first time we built it,
it said build succeeded, it linked,
it tried to launch and
then got a run failure.
You're going to see that a lot
if you have zero link turned on.
So what we recommend doing is if you
have a build succeed using zero link,
what we recommend you do
is that you switch over to
the deployment build style,
which turns off zero link,
try building again, and then you'll see
your real link errors.
You want to know about those link
errors because they are link errors.
They are things that
will happen at runtime,
either early or late,
depending upon what they are.
But don't take build
succeeded as a failure.
As everything is fixed.
Always go to the deployment style and try
a build there just to make sure it works.
Okay?
Development and deployment
styles are really,
really powerful,
and they'll make it a lot easier
for you to work with multiple
targets in Xcode than you've
had it before in Code Warrior.
Development and deployment styles,
as Anders explained yesterday,
are extra sets of flags that override
other settings in your target.
And what that lets you do is it
lets you have a debug version,
a profile version, a beta test version,
and a final version of your
application with the same target,
without having to have
four separate targets.
And what that means is if you need
to change a target setting or if
you need to add a file to a target,
you don't need to change
it in four separate places.
You just change it in your one target,
and then that is layered on top.
And that's what we're going to do.
We're going to do a lot of the
same things on top of by the
four different build styles.
It really makes it a lot
easier to manage your target.
So we recommend that instead of,
you know, when we import your
Code Warrior projects,
we're going to import
all of your targets,
even if there's a debug version
and a production version.
What we recommend you do is that
you essentially delete the debug
target from your Xcode project.
Just use the production one,
and then set all of your debug settings
in the development and deployment styles.
And that's what we're going to do.
We're going to use the development
build style of the production target.
And that way you'll only
have one target to manage,
much less complexity,
and you'll have much better control over
what you want in your debug targets.
[Transcript missing]
There are some other differences,
and these are a little more serious.
If you've been using
Code Warrior for a long time,
you probably have put
C++ code into .c files,
because Code Warrior doesn't care.
Now, GCC does care, and GCC,
in its native state,
will tell you if you use C++-isms,
that is, things that are specifically C++
and not just C99 extensions to
C to make it look more like C++,
it will warn you if you try to
declare a class in a .c file.
It will give an error if you try
to declare a class in a .c file.
Once again,
you can cheat and turn on .xc++,
and GCC will happily... interpret
all your .c files as C++,
but the rest of Xcode,
which doesn't get information on the
compiler from which language semantics
you used for which specific file,
may get confused.
For example,
the debugger applies debugging
semantics to your source
code based on its extension.
And so if you have a class
declared in a .c file,
the debugger is not necessarily
going to see that well or clearly.
So I really recommend
that if you have C++,
you change it to .cp files,
and if you have just straight C code,
you can leave that in .c files.
That's probably the number
one thing we see in projects
moving over from Code Warrior,
is C++ code in C files.
GCC differs where the
standards are undefined.
The order of calling
C++ static initializers,
especially if you're
moving from CFM to Maco,
where the order of library
initialization may also be different,
is that if your code relies on a
specific order of initialization
of static initializers,
there will probably be problems,
and you'll need to work those out
and debug those very carefully.
You can have some fine-grained
control over it by link order,
but it's something that
you need to expect,
is that your static initializers
may not be called in the
deterministic order you saw,
mainly because Maco loads
modules lazily and dynamically,
whereas CFM did everything all up front.
The second thing is that there's some
disagreement on how you pass structs
and unions that are packed into
quantities smaller than four bytes.
There are some differences there.
Most of these differences are
not clearly documented either in
the Code Warrior documentation
or the GCC documentation.
You can join some of the Apple mailing
lists or look on Usenet for
either of the Code Warrior groups,
codewarrior.mac or compsys, mac,
programming, codewarrior.
Both of those have pretty
long discussions of the
differences between GCC and the
Code Warrior compiler in these respects.
And finally, GCC uses the C and C++,
in fact it supplies the C and C++
standard libraries that ship with
Mac OS X in both static and dynamic form,
and codewarrior supplies
its own libraries,
the MetroWorks standard libraries,
or MSL, that go with the compiler and
heretofore have been statically
linked into your applications.
When you move from Codewarrior to GCC,
you are moving from the
MSL standard libraries to
the Apple standard libraries,
and there are some big differences
there you need to know about.
The good news is that if
you're building for Maco,
the MSL standard libraries are
essentially a thin layer on
the Apple standard libraries.
So most of the behavior is the same
except for a small layer of differences.
The other good news is that MSL has
been supporting WHRT and WString,
a wide character support in C and C++,
for many years,
but they couldn't supply it in their
Maco libraries because it wasn't in the
underlying Apple libraries as of Jaguar.
It's now there in Panther,
so if you have programs that have relied
on WHR and WString support in MSL,
and you couldn't go to
Maco because of that,
you can do that now in Panther.
Because that supports in
the underlying library,
and it's taken advantage of
by the MSL standard libraries.
And this is a good implementation
of WHR and WString.
It's the Citrus project.
It's been heavily tested in NetBSD.
It's not something we invented ourself.
It's really good code.
Another thing you'll run into
is that Apple libraries tend
to use the global namespace,
not the STD namespace, for many things.
Many things that MetroWorks standard
libraries put in the STD namespace.
This may mean that you need to make some
changes to your code if you're expecting
things to be in the STD namespace.
It may mean that you need to change some
conflicts where things that you have
in your code will conflict with things
that are now in the global namespace.
If you're using the
standard template libraries,
MetroWorks STL has some very
useful functions for debugging
that you invoke if you set a macro.
Setting that macro is
innocent in Apple's STL.
It does nothing.
You lose that debugging capability,
but it causes no harm.
And then Apple libraries don't
have certain MetroWorks extensions
that they've added over the years.
For example, FS-Spec versions of the
POSIX file system calls.
Since we're an underlying
Unix operating system,
we really do expect you to start
using some of the underlying
file calls or use Carbon.
You know, use all Carbon or all Unix and
not necessarily this strange mix
of making a POSIX call with an
FS-Spec as your file reference.
We've added some compatibility
features to make it easier to
bring large quantities of code
over from Code Warrior to GCC.
One of them is we've
added some pragma support,
not a lot, but it's getting better.
We've added MetroWorks-style
inline assembly.
If you happen to have the
inline PowerPC assembler code,
you can bring that in from
your Code Warrior project
to your Xcode project.
We've brought several
large projects over,
one of them the Mac MAME video
game environment,
which is tens, hundreds of thousands of
lines of inline assembly,
and we compile that.
So if you've got a lot
of inline assembly,
don't worry about bringing
that over from Code Warrior.
We can read it.
Now once you're in Xcode,
you want to take advantage
of the Xcode features.
The reason to bring your
project over is not because
you're bored with Code Warrior,
but because we've shown you
some compelling things in Xcode,
such as the zero link,
the predictive compilation,
the fix and continue,
the debugging things I'll show
you tomorrow that you really
want to take advantage of.
How do you turn those on?
Well, it's really pretty simple.
The prerequisites are you
have to use native projects,
which are done by default when
you bring it in with the importer.
If you're bringing in a
project builder project,
you have to upgrade your targets from
Jam-based targets to native targets.
And to get most of these features,
you have to move to the GCC 3.3 compiler,
which you can use in the project
settings dialog is just change your
compiler to system default or GCC 3.3.
Once you're there,
You move to the GCC style precompiled
headers to get GCC's performance.
If you don't move to
the precompiled headers,
the compiler is really slow.
It's just as slow as turning off
precompiled headers in MetroWorks.
The other thing is that using
precompiled headers just from
frameworks gets you a lot,
but the more of your project
headers you can precompile,
the better.
Really, the more headers you precompile,
the faster it is.
You can enable predictive compilation,
and that means we will
fire up the compiler in the
background while you type,
and that will really
get you a speed benefit.
As I said the other day,
when you include Carbon,
Carbon.h in any source file,
the headers that are brought in are
three and a half megabytes of source.
Now, most of you don't have anywhere
near that in an individual C file,
so the ratio of headers to source
in a given compilation unit,
it's huge.
And the more of that we
can do ahead of time,
the faster the couple hundred...
couple thousand lines of actual C,
C++ we need to compile will go.
So predictive compilation will
really speed up your turnaround
time by doing most of the work in
the background while you're typing.
Zero link speeds up your fix, build,
link, relaunch cycle by not having
to relink all of those
modules that haven't changed.
It's really a lot faster.
I mean, it can cut a 30-second
link down to 10 seconds.
Fix and continue can cut that
down to zero seconds by actually
not having to have you stop the
application in the debugger,
quit it, fix it, and relaunch it.
If you can fix something
without quitting,
then that saves both the quit
time and the relaunch time and all
the time it takes to get back to
that point in your program where
you're doing your diagnostics.
And then if you happen to have
C++ projects and big C++ projects,
distributed builds can really help
you with your large world builds.
It's not necessarily good
for incremental compilations.
It's not that great for C code
because C is not computationally
intensive to compile,
and sometimes the network
transfer time will exceed that.
But if you have big,
big C++ files that take a long
time for the compiler to work on,
if you can send those out
to multiple compilers,
then that's a great way
to get back to the core.
And if you have multiple
compilers in parallel,
you can see some quantum
increases in your build time by
turning on distributed builds.
Let me talk a little bit about
packaging and localization,
because it's the last
thing you need to do.
If you're bringing a project over,
a Carbon project over to Xcode,
you may also be making the
transition from a two-fork
resource-based file to a packaged file.
Let me walk through a little bit of that.
When you package your target,
you pick what you're going to be doing,
an application, a plug-in,
a shared library, a framework, a tool.
In Xcode, you pick that up front.
Right now, we don't have the capability
to change the target style
once you've built the target.
So you need to know what
you're doing up front,
and it's kind of hard to change from
a static library to a shared library.
And right now, we don't have a capability
of cloning targets.
So just make sure to know what
you're doing ahead of time.
Most targets are packages.
Almost everything except a static
link library and a Unix tool
will not create a single file,
but will create a folder
with a bunch of files in it.
And the trick in packaging
is figuring out what files
to put where in that package.
Tech Note 2015 explains all about the
various package styles and what they are.
If you don't know what I'm talking about,
read that Tech Note first.
Xcode puts things where they belong
in your package automatically.
Right now it doesn't have a copy files
build phase like Project Builder did
that lets you do manual overrides.
We will add that by the 1.0.
But right now if you put a resource file,
if you put a header file,
if you put compiled
code into your project,
Xcode will put it into the right
place in your package automatically
because it knows the rules by
which packages should be built.
It takes all the target settings from the
target settings and the project settings,
it builds those into the Info.plist file,
it puts the Info.plist file
where it belongs.
It really takes a lot of the
manual effort out of that.
Working with resources.
As I said,
we read .R files and we read .RCRC files.
We also will read PPoB files and
merge them into your resources file.
And we interact with resourcer,
constructor, and interface builder.
If you're localizing your resources,
localizing resources in a packaged
application is different than
what you used to do in CFM.
In CFM,
what you used to do was you'd have one
two-fork file with all of your code and
then the resources for one language,
and then you'd produce another
file with the same code and the
resources for a different language,
and then you'd produce another
file with the same code and the
resources for a third language.
Well, the way you do it on Mac OS X is
that you have one folder
hierarchy called a package,
and it has one copy
of the code over here,
and then it has different
folders called .lproj folders
for your different languages.
And your resources, your nibs,
your strings, anything language-dependent
goes in the .lproj folders.
Okay?
It's a different way of thinking.
You deliver one binary that's
multilingual rather than localizing.
You're binaries.
Mac OS X apps are
multilingual by default,
and the way you make them multilingual
is you take a file that has
language-dependent constructs in it,
like a strings file or a
nib file or a resource file,
you go to its inspector,
and you look at this thing
called localization variance.
And you can add a locale,
and it makes a clone of that
file that you then localize,
and then it puts each of those
into the right .lproj folders.
So Xcode does this for you automatically.
It will manage your hierarchy
of localized versions.
You can start with English and
then localize from there.
Let me talk briefly about
Interface Builder for Carbon.
Eric did a great demo of the
new stuff in Interface Builder.
Interface Builder is
the Aqua design tool.
The Aqua design tool.
And as we evolve Aqua for
both Carbon and Cocoa,
we evolve Interface Builder
to give you access to those.
And there's going to be more on Interface
Builder and Carbon in the Building a
Modern Mac Application session,
which I'll tell you about in a minute.
But I just want to retouch on some
of the things that Eric talked about.
New in Interface Builder for
Carbon is support for new
Carbon controls like the HI image view,
the HI search field, the HI scroll view,
and the HI text view.
You can drop these into your nib
files directly from Interface
Builder for your Carbon application.
We've also added the tiny controls if
you're building very small pallets.
We're going to start using
these in the Panther version
of Xcode because they're very,
very useful for things like inspector
panels where you want to pack a
lot of buttons into a small space.
These are now on the pallet for Interface
Builder for your Carbon applications.
and new are control properties.
This is static information that you
can enter into Interface Builder
that lives behind an object that when
you load that object from the nib,
these constants are
already set in that object.
So your APIs can query that object
that it loaded from the nib and
get these constant values from it.
So if you want to parameterize things or
if you want to preset titles or if you
want to have alternates or anything your
API wants to do with information that you
would normally put in a resource fork,
you can put them behind the
objects in your nib file.
And this is a very powerful
thing that will give you back
in nibs some of the things that
you used to have in resources.
And finally,
because we've changed the format
of the nib file for Panther,
there's some fairly strong nib file
compatibility checking that you
can do in Interface Builder itself,
that you can tell when you're
building it whether you're using
Panther-specific functions,
whether you're using
Jaguar-specific functions,
and how backwards
compatible your nib will be.
So you can be careful about
not accidentally constructing
an application where all your
code might run fine on Jaguar,
but it loads a nib that happens to
exploit Panther-specific functionality,
so your application will
fail when it runs on Panther.
Okay, just about right on time,
going to wrap up.
Hope you've learned from this session
that we've given a lot of thought in
Xcode to your Carbon applications,
especially bringing your
Carbon applications over
from where they exist now,
which is most likely in Code Warrior.
We build C++ code really well.
We adhere to the standards,
we build it fast, we build good code.
We build good applications that
adhere to the Mach OS X standards.
We build packages, we use resources,
we use NIBs.
You're going to find that Xcode
is the best way to build your
Carbon applications on Mach OS X.
There's a lot more you need to learn
than just listening to my presentation.
There's a lot of documentation
in the Xcode tool package.
in the system overview.
For the CVS and Perforce integration,
there are, you can go to the CVS and
Perforce sites for those.
The most important book to cover,
what I've been talking about today,
is this Moving Projects from
Code Warrior to Project Builder.
It's not on your distribution,
but it's in your ADC account.
Log into your ADC account and you can
download it from the Downloads folder.
You can also get hard copies
of it down in our porting lab,
which is,
it's called the Mach OS X Laboratory,
down on the second floor,
down on the first floor.
Integrating Carbon and Cocoa in your
application is a really interesting book
if you want to start learning how to take
advantage of some of the Cocoa functions
from your Carbon application.
And then, of course,
the definitive guide to the
Mach-O runtime architecture and
the GNU C C++ Objective-C compiler.
If you're moving to Mach-O and
GCC for the first time,
those are going to be
indispensable resources.
Of course,
there are Xcode Interface Builder release
notes on the distribution you have.
And there are some places
to go for tech notes,
tech Q&As, and sample code.
They're all on the ADC homepage.
Godfrey de Georgie is the
champion for this technology.
Contact him if you have questions.
We have the
Development Tools Engineering Feedback,
which is at
xcode-feedback@group.apple.com.
Please post bug reports.
We want to make this a great
Carbon development environment,
and if there is something that
we're being bonehead about or we've
forgotten about in Carbon development,
please let us know.
We'll try to get it in by the 1-0.
And look at the mailing lists on
lists.apple.com or the Usenets groups.
I'm going to be living on CompSys
Mac Programmer for the next few weeks,
listening to what you have to say
about it if you happen to be on Usenet.
Here are some great sessions to go to.
Feedback Forum 9 today, 2:00.
Let us know how we're doing.
Debugging services for Mac OS X.
This is the overview of Xcode and GDB.
It's today at 3:30.
That's not going to be a
Carbon-oriented session.
That's going to be a
GDB-oriented session.
Debugging and tuning Carbon applications.
I'll be in the big room tomorrow morning,
9:00, and we're going to show you some
great debugging features for
Carbon applications using Xcode.
Software testing tools.
There's some fun stuff going on
there for automated testing of your
Carbon application using Apple tools
and using third-party applications.
That's tomorrow at 10:30.
And the session I was
referring to before,
how to write a modern Carbon application.
If you've been using basic, modern,
modern applications,
basically the same APIs and
resources for the past nine years,
and you don't know what NIBs are
and you don't know what HIView is,
there's a completely different way
to write a great Carbon application,
and you should learn about that.
2:00 tomorrow afternoon.